# Emmett Resources

Here you will find additional resources to help Emmett do his thing. At the moment, that is just a PCB layout that works with Emmett.

## Hotplate PCB Layout

The hotplate PCB layout in this directory contains the following features that are important for working with Emmett. If you are considering making a different layout, the following information may assist you in understanding what aspects of the layour are important for working with Emmett, as currently coded. Note that it is possible to implement your own track router implementation with it's own analysis and routing logic.

1. The board is assumed to be rectangular with rounded corners, formed by four straight lines and four 90° arcs. The detection of the board extents and the resize function are built on these assumptions and may not function if the edge cuts layer is formed differently.
1. The board has four mounting holes that are located near the corners. They are identified by being the only four footprints on the board with through-holes. Proper detection of the courtyard is not implemented, so the clearance radius around the holes is currently hard-coded.
1. The thermal fuse pads are assumed to be the two pads closest to the centre and are assumed to be oriented vertically to fit between the heating element traces. Courtyard detection is not implemented, so the code currently assumes a hard-coded 0.25mm courtyard around the edges of the pads.
1. The power connection pads are assumed to be placed on either side of the centre of the top edge of the board. Courtyard detection is not implemented, so the code currently assumes a hard-coded 0.25mm courtyard around the edges of the pads.
1. If you wish for text to be written onto the board containing the layout generation parameters, the code breaks the text up into three sections - mechanical, thermal and eletrical parameters. Emmett will insert this text into the first text element it finds on the board starting with *Track Width: *, *Maximum Temperature: * and *Cold Resistance: * respectively. If you place text element with that text in it, Emmett will write the generation parameters into them. They are not required. If any one of them is not found, that text will simply not be written onto the board.

## Manufacturing Considerations

The current layout is designed for use on an aluminium substrate. The board must have a thermal fuse link installed to be usable.

If you want a completely flat top, you can use countersunk M3 screws for mounting the hotplate. Ideally, this should use a 2mm aluminium plate. A 2mm plate would also be better for heat transfer, however 2mm aluminium does require a substantial price increase over the lowest price 1.6mm options available online. A 1.6mm aluminium plate may be ok for countersunk screw, but given the limited thickness of the material you will need to be very careful that you don't countersink too deeply and lose precious material for the screw head to hold on to. Don't overtighten the screws, as the 1.6mm material can deform outwards and upwards with excessive pressure from a countersunk screw. Of course, you can also use pan-head or truss-head screws which will hold the plate more securely and avoid these risks at the cost of losing an unobstructed flat top.

The most basic and low cost options include 1 W/m.K adhesive/dielectric layer between the copper traces and the aluminium substrate. This refers to the thermal conductivity of this layer. Higher numbers are better but also generally more expensive. The best materials available have a thermal conductivity of about 3 W/m.K. Better conductivity should ensure better heat transfer into the substrate and more even heating. It's as yet unclear how significant this difference may be, but given that the thermal conductivity of the aluminium substrate is somewhere in the 150-200 W/m.K and the copper traces are even higher, it's likely that this dielectric layer is the thermal bottleneck and better thermal conductivity may reduce some of the thermal stresses that could eventually lead to delamination of the traces from the substrate and eventual failure of the hotplate. If/when I have more data I will update this page on the durability differences between 1 W/m.K and 3 W/m.K dielectric adhesives.

### Soldering

The power connections and fuse link need to be soldered to the board using a high temperature solder alloy. For reflowing both tin-lead and tin-bismuth solder paste, the following solder alloys are suggested.

1. SN100C and similar alloys such as K100LD from Kester and CQ100Ge from Chipquik. These alloys are all approximately 0.7% copper and around 99.3% tin, with potentially small amounts of other materials like nickel or germanium. They have melting a melting point of 227°C which provides a nice margin above the 183°C melting point of tin-lead solder. It has generally has good flow and wetting properties and is reasonably easy to work with. This is probably your best bet, especially if your soldering skills are under-developed. It's fairly easy to find and is usually available in sizes typical for use with electronics and often with a flux core. I've even seen dollar store that was supposedly 99.3% tin and 0.7% copper and it did have the high melting point, but seemed to be a pain to work with. Maybe the extra components in the more premium brands are what's needed to improve wetting and flow, but if you can get sufficient heat and a good flux, even that dollar store stuff may work provided it has the high melting point.
1. 95-5 tin-antimony solder. This is most commonly found for use in plumbing and often as solid core wire from vendors such as Forney or Oatey more typically associated with plumbing than with electronics. It's higher melting range of 232-240°C make it better than SN100C from a thermal performance perspective, however it has poor wetting and flow characteristics that can make the formation of good solder joints difficult. I've used it very successfully for years, but it does require good heating and flux use to form good joints. If you're unfamiliar with how to identify proper wetting of the metal surfaces when soldering, you may wish to use a different alloy. It is possible to form blobs of solder around the wire that have limited fusion between the solder and the underlying copper which may lead to problems during operation. These problems may not be initially obvious but may deteriorate over time and lead to premature failure of the joint and/or the board.
1. SAC305, SAC405 and similar lead-free solder alloys. These are mostly tin with 3-4% silver and 0.5% copper and have a melting range from 217°C and 219°C. They are the most common lead-free alloy used in electronics today. While it's possible to use SAC305/405 for this purpose, the lower melting point makes it less desirable. However, it's soldering characteristics are well understood and if you already have some on-hand, it does provide an option that avoids the need to spend money on a new solder that you may have limited use for. Provided you configure your hotplate to keep the operating temperatures to levels that won't reflow your thermal fuse and power connections, it should be fine. I have formed good tin-lead solder joints on hotplates not operating above 205°C. I haven't tested a hotplate using this alloy, but in theory is can work.

Other tips:

* Use a good flux. SMD291 from Chipquik works well and is reasonably easy to clean up with low residue. I've also used Chipquik NC191 which worked, but seems less agressive than SMD291. Other reputable brands of tacky flux are probably fine also, but these are the ones I've tried that worked well enough to recommend. I've also used MG Chemicals 8342 RA rosin flux paste. It works, but leaves a lot of residue and makes clean up a pain. These solder joints will be subjected to a harsh environment. You want to give yourself the best chance of good quality joints. Avoid cheap, unidentifiable fluxes for less consequential soldering.
* Consider pre-tinning your fuse link and power connections prior to soldering onto the board. It is often easier to get good wetting with your chosen alloy and you pre-tin the wire. You are more free to apply sufficient heat and flux to the end of the wire this way and a pre-tinned wire will be easier to form a good joint than a bare wire. The same goes for the pads. Pre-tinning with your chosen alloy may make the final soldering easier and produce a higher quality joint than without pre-tinning.
* Use plenty of solder. These are relatively large pads and relatively large wires you will be soldering onto your hotplate. If you've going with the cheapest manufacturing options, you probably also have a thin layer of tin-lead solder attached to the pad. You want to dilute that as much as possible to avoid the possibility of a layer of low melting point alloy between your solder joint and the pad. Flowing plenty of solder into the joint should help achieve this. Don't go overboard, but the joint should look like a solid lump of metal when you're done, not just a thin film of solder over and between the joint components.

## Assembly

The board should be mounted in a way that allows levelling of the hotplate. A simple solution to creating four levelling legs for the hotplate can be created using some longer M3 screws, M3 nuts and some F-F M3 metal stand-offs. Something like a socket-head cap screws are ideal as they provide a relatively flat head that can work ok as a foot. Wind a nut onto the cap screw a reasonable way along the thread. Then screw the cap screw into one end of a stand-off. The other end of the stand-off gets screwed to the hotplate using some shorter screws of your choosing. You can adjust the height of the leg by screwing the cap screw more or less into the bottom of the stand-off. Once you have the height where you need it, you can tighten up the nut against the stand-off to lock it in place. It's a good idea to include washers where you secure the hotplate to the stand-off to spread the load onto more of the aluminium substrate.

Tip: If you're having trouble finding a spanner to fit onto typical M3 hex stand-offs, try a 3/16". Go figure!

